# RFC 791

## IPv4 Datagram Format

```txt
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|Version|  IHL  |Type of Service|          Total Length         |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|         Identification        |Flags|      Fragment Offset    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Time to Live |    Protocol   |         Header Checksum       |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       Source Address                          |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Destination Address                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Options                    |    Padding    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

- The version number field specifies the IP protocol version of the datagram.
- The header length field specifies the length of the IP header. Most IP datagrams do not contain options, so the typical IP datagram has a 20-byte header.
- The type of service bits allow different types of IP datagrams to be distinguished from each other.
- The datagram length specifies the total length of the IP datagram.
- The identifier, flags, and fragmentation offset fields refer to IP fragmentation, when a large IP datagram is broken into several smaller IP datagrams which are then forwarded to the destination.
- The time-to-live field is included to ensure that datagrams do not circulate forever in the network. The field is decremented each time the datagram is processed in a router. If the TTL field reaches 0, a router must drop that datagram.
- The protocol field is used when an IP datagram reaches its final destination. The value of this field indicates the specific transport-layer protocol to which the data portion of this IP datagram should be passed. `6` represents TCP and `17` represents UDP.
- The header checksum field aids a router in detecting bit errors in a received IP datagram. The checksum treats each 2 bytes in the header as a number and summing these numbers using 1s complement arithmetic.
- Source and destination IP address refer to the source address and destination address of the IP datagram.

## IPv4 Address

Each IP address is 32 bits long and could be written in the dotted-decimal notation, in which each byte of the address is written in its decimal form. Each interface on the host and router in the global Internet must have a unique IP address. In the Internet, hsots are connected to subnets, and subnets are interconnected with routers.

Subnet is a network segment that is a logical partition of an IP network. In a subnet, a range of IP addresses is reserved to be used within that particular subnet. The subnet mask is a 32-bit value used to divide an IP address into a network portion and a host portion. The network portion identifies the subnet, while the host portion identifies a specific device within the subnet.

CIDR stands for Classless Interdomain Routing. It is a method used to allocate and define IP addresses and their associated network prefixes. CIDR generalizes the notion of subnet addressing. The `x` most significant bits of an address of the form `a.b.c.d/x` constitute the network portion of the IP address, and are often referred to as the prefix of the address. Each organization is assigned a block of contiguous addresses.

The remaining `32 - x` bits of an address can be thought of as distinguishing among the devices within the organization, all of which have the same network prefix These are the bits that will be considered when forwarding packets at routers within the organization. The organization's internal structure might be such that these `32 - x` rightmost bits are used for subnetting within the organization.

### IPv4 Fragmentation

IP fragmentation is a process used in computer networking when transmitting IP packets over a network that has a smaller maximum transmission unit (MTU) size than the packet's original size. The MTU represents the maximum amount of data that can be transmitted in a single network frame or packet.

The source router breaks the packet into fragments based on the MTU size of the next link. The destination host reconstruct the original packet.

- The identifier is a unique identifier for all fragments in the same IP packet.
- The MF flag is `1` when there are more fragments and is `0` in the last fragment.
- The fragment offset is the distance from the first byte in the original payload to the first byte in the fragmented payload.

### IPv4 Address Assignment

In order to obtain a block of IP addresses for use within an organization’s subnet, a network administrator might first contact its ISP, which would provide addresses from a larger block of addresses that had been allocated to the ISP.

Once an organization has obtained a block of addresses, it can assign individual IP addresses to the host and router interfaces in its organization. The router assigns IP addresses to hosts with the DHCP protocol. DHCP allows a host to learn additional information, such as its subnet mask, the address of its first-hop router, and the address of its local DNS server.

- The client sends a broadcasting message to all hosts in the subnet.
- The DHCP server responds to the client with a DHCP offer message that is broadcast to all hosts in the subnet. Each server offer message contains the transaction identifier of the received message, the proposed IP address for the client, the network mask, and an IP address lease time.
- The arriving client will choose a server and respond to its selected offer with a DHCP request message, echoing back the configuration parameters.
- The server responds to the DHCP request message with a DHCP ACK message, confirming the requested parameters.

### Network Address Translation

Devices within a given home network can send packets to each other using `10.0.0.0/24` addressing.

The NAT-enabled router does not look like a router to the outside world. Instead the NAT router behaves to the outside world as a single device with a single IP address. The router is hiding the details of the home network from the outside world.

For each outgoing packet, NAT replaces the private IP address of the device with the public IP address assigned to the router and translates the source port number to an assigned port number.

NAT maintains a translation table that keeps track of the mappings between private IP addresses, port numbers, and the corresponding public IP addresses and port numbers. The table allows the router to route incoming packets back to the host on the local network.
