# RFC 9293

RFC 793 contains a discussion of the TCP design goals and provides examples of its operation, including examples of connection establishment, connection termination, and packet retransmission to repair losses. RFC 9293 obsoletes several updates to RFC 793 and describes the basic functionalities expected in modern TCP implementations.

## Introduction

- TCP provides a reliable, in-order, byte-stream service to applications.
- The application byte-stream is conveyed over the network via TCP segments, with each TCP segment sent as an Internet Protocol (IP) datagram.
- TCP detects packet losses via sequence numbers and errors via per-segment checksums, as well as correction via retransmission.
- TCP is connection oriented, but it can't detect connection liveness.
- TCP uses port numbers to locate application services and to multiplex distinct flows between hosts.

## TCP Header Format

TCP segments are sent as internet datagrams. The Internet Protocol header carries several information fields, including the source and destination host addresses. The TCP heaeder follows the IP headers and supplies information specific to TCP.

```text
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          Source Port          |       Destination Port        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Sequence Number                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Acknowledgment Number                      |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Data |       |C|E|U|A|P|R|S|F|                               |
| Offset| Rsrvd |W|C|R|C|S|S|Y|I|            Window             |
|       |       |R|E|G|K|H|T|N|N|                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Checksum            |         Urgent Pointer        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                           [Options]                           |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               :
:                             Data                              :
:                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

- The source port field represents the source port number.
- The destination port field represents the destination port number.
- The sequence number field represents the sequence number of the first data octet in this segment, except when the SYN flag is set. If SYN is set, the sequence number is the initial sequence number (ISN) and the first data octet is ISN + 1.
- The acknowledgement number field represents the value of the next sequence number the sender of the segment is expected to receive if the ACK control bit is set. Once a connection is established, this field is required.
- The data offset field represents the number of 32-bit words in the TCP header, which indicates where the data begins.
- The reserved field is reserved for future use.
- The control bits field contains a set of control bits.
  - CWR: Congestion Window Reduced
  - ECE: ECN-Echo
  - URG: Urgent pointer field is significant
  - ACK: Acknowledgment field is significant
  - PSH: Push function
  - RST: Reset the connection
  - SYN: Synchronize sequence number
  - FIN: No more data from sender
- The window field is the unsigned number of data octets beginning with the one indicated in the acknowledgment field that the sender of this segment is willing to accept.
- The checksum field is the 16-bit ones' complement of the ones' complement sum of all 16-bit words in the header and text. The checksum also covers a pseudo-header prefixed to the TCP header, which is 96 bits for IPv4 and 320 bits for IPv6.

```txt
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|           Source Address          |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|         Destination Address       |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|  zero  |  PTCL  |    TCP Length   |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
```

- The urgent pointer field communicates the current value of the urgent pointer as a positive offset from the sequence number in this segment. The urgent pointer points to the sequence number of the octet following the urgent data.
- The options field represents a list of options that are a multiple of 8 bits in length.

## Connection State Variable

### Send

Variable   | Description
-----------|------------------------------------------------------------
SND.UNA    | send unacknowledged
SND.NXT    | send next
SND.WND    | send window
SND.UP     | send urgent pointer
SND.WL1    | segment sequence number used for last window update
SND.WL2    | segment acknowledgment number used for last window update
ISS        | initial send sequence number

- `[0, SND.UNA)`: The sequence numbers that have been acknowledged
- `[SND.UNA, SND.NXT)`: The sequence numbers of unacknowledged data
- `[SND.NXT, SND.UNA + SND.WND)`: The sequence numbers allowed for new data transmission
- `[SND.UNA + SND.WND, INT_MAX)`: The sequence numbers that are not allowed to send

### Receive

Variable   | Description
-----------|------------------------------------------------------------
RCV.NXT    | receive next
RCV.WND    | receive window
RCV.UP     | receive urgent pointer
IRS        | initial receive sequence number

- `[0, RCV.NXT)`: The sequence numbers that have been acknowledged
- `[RCV.NXT, RCV.NXT + RCV.WND)`: The sequence numbers allowed for new reception
- `[RCV.NXT + RCV.WND, INT_MAX)`: The sequence numbers that are not allowed to receive

## State Machine

Each connection progresses through a series of states during its lifetime. The states are: `LISTEN`, `SYN-SENT`, `SYN-RECEIVED`, `ESTABLISHED`, `FIN-WAIT-1`, `FIN-WAIT-2`, `CLOSE-WAIT`, `CLOSING`, `LAST-ACK`, `TIME-WAIT`, and the fictional state `CLOSED`. `CLOSED` is fictional because it represents the state when there is no connection.

Each connection progresses from one state to another in response to events. The events are the user calls, the incoming segments, and timeouts.

- `LISTEN` represents waiting for a connection request from a remote TCP peer and port.
- `SYN-SENT` represents waiting for a matching connection request after having sent a connection request.
- `SYN-RECEIVED` represents waiting for a confirming connection request acknowledgment after having both received and sent a connection request.
- `ESTABLISHED` represents an open connection, data received can be delivered to the user.
- `FIN-WAIT-1` represents waiting for a connection termination request from the remote TCP peer, or an acknowledgment of the connection termination request.
- `FIN-WAIT-2` represents waiting for a connection termination request from the remote TCP peer.
- `CLOSE-WAIT` represents waiting for a connection termination request from the local user.
- `CLOSING` represents waiting for a connection termination request acknowledgment from the remote TCP peer.
- `LAST-ACK` represents waiting for an acknowledgment of the connection termination request sent to the remote TCP peer.
- `TIME-WAIT` represents waiting for enough time to pass to be sure the remote TCP peer received the acknowledgment of its connection termination request.
- `CLOSED` represents no connection state.

## Sequence Number

Each octet of data sent over a TCP connection has a sequence number and each of them can be acknowledged. The acknowledgment mechanism is cumulative so that an acknowledgment of sequence number `X` indicates that all octets up to but not including `X` have been received.

In response to sending data, the TCP endpoint will receive acknowledgments. `SEG.ACK` should be in the range `(SND.UNA, SND.NXT]`. Each segment in the retransmission queue is acknowledged if the sum of its sequence number and length is less than or equal to the acknowledgement value.

- `SND.UNA`: oldest unacknowledged sequence number
- `SND.NXT`: next sequence number to be sent
- `SEG.ACK`: acknowledgment (next sequence number expected) from the receiving TCP peer
- `SEG.SEQ`: first sequence number of a segment
- `SEG.LEN`: the number of octets occupied by the data in the segment, including SYN and FIN
- `SEG.SEQ + SEG.LEN - 1`: last sequence number of a segment

When a data is received, the segment is judged to be in the valid receive sequence space if `SEG.SQE` or `SEG.SQE + SEG.LEN - 1` is in the range `[RCV.NXT, RCV.NXT + RCV.WND)`.

`SYN` and `FIN` are included in the sequence space to enable them to be retransmitted and acknowledged without confusion. For sequence number purposes, the `SYN` is considered to occur before the first actual data octet of the segment in which it occurs, while the `FIN` is considered to occur after the last actual data octet in a segment in which it occurs. When a `SYN` is present, then `SEG.SEQ` is the sequence number of the `SYN`. `SEG.LEN` includes both data and `SYN` or `FIN` if present.

## Establishing a Connection

The handshake is the procedure used to establish a connection. The procedure is described in the following diagram.

```text
    TCP Peer A                                           TCP Peer B
1.  CLOSED                                               LISTEN
2.  SYN-SENT    --> <SEQ=100><CTL=SYN>               --> SYN-RECEIVED
3.  ESTABLISHED <-- <SEQ=300><ACK=101><CTL=SYN,ACK>  <-- SYN-RECEIVED
4.  ESTABLISHED --> <SEQ=101><ACK=301><CTL=ACK>       --> ESTABLISHED
5.  ESTABLISHED --> <SEQ=101><ACK=301><CTL=ACK><DATA> --> ESTABLISHED
```

### Reset Generation

Reset is sent whenever a segment arrives that is not intended for the current connection. The receiver of the reset aborts the connection.

- If the connection does not exist (`CLOSED`), then a reset is sent in response to any incoming segment except another reset. The `SYN` segment that does not match an existing connection is rejected.
- If the connection is in an non-synchronized state and the incoming segment acknowledges something not sent, then a reset is sent.

## Closing a Connection

The closing operation means there's no more data to send, which is performend in a simplex fashion. The client that closed the connection might continue to receive segments until the TCP receiver is told that the remote peer has closed the connection.

- If the client initiates the close operation, a `FIN` segment without data can be constructed and placed on the outgoing segment queue. All segments preceding and including `FIN` will be retransmitted until acknowledged. When the client has both acknowledged the `FIN` and sent a `FIN` of its own, the first TCP peer can `ACK` this `FIN`.
- If the client receives an unsolicited `FIN` from the network, the client could send a `FIN` to the other TCP peer after sending remaining data. The client waits until its own `FIN` is acknowledged and it deletes the connection. If an `ACK` is not forthcoming, the connection is aborted after a specific timeout. The client's `FIN` could be merged with the `ACK` of the TCP peer's `FIN`, which saves a segment.

```txt
    TCP Peer A                                           TCP Peer B
1.  ESTABLISHED                                          ESTABLISHED
2.  (Close)
    FIN-WAIT-1  --> <SEQ=100><ACK=300><CTL=FIN,ACK>  --> CLOSE-WAIT
3.  FIN-WAIT-2  <-- <SEQ=300><ACK=101><CTL=ACK>      <-- CLOSE-WAIT
4.                                                       (Close)
    TIME-WAIT   <-- <SEQ=300><ACK=101><CTL=FIN,ACK>  <-- LAST-ACK
5.  TIME-WAIT   --> <SEQ=101><ACK=301><CTL=ACK>      --> CLOSED
6.  (2 MSL)
    CLOSED
```

## Data Communication

Once the connection is established, the TCP peers exchange segments of data. TCP uses retransmission to solve segment errors or network congestion and performs certain tests on the sequence and acknowledgement numbers to filter duplicate segments.

- When the sender creates a segment and transmits it, the sender advances `SND.NXT`.
- When the receiver accepts a segment, it advances `RCV.NXT` and sends an acknowledgment.
- When the data sender receives an acknowledgment, it advances `SND.UNA`.

### Retransmission

The TCP peer sets a retransmission timer (RTO) on `SND.UNA` to detect packet losses. If `SND.UNA` is acknowledged, the timer is restarted on the next `SND.UNA`. When the timer expires, the peer retransmits the segments starting with `SND.UNA`.

The TCP peer determines the length of RTO based on the estimated RTT. The sample RTT for a segment is the amount of time between when the segment is sent and when an acknowledgment for the segment is received. TCP updates the estimated RTT based on the weighted average of multiple sample RTT values. If the sample RTT values have little fluctuation, the deviated RTT will be small.

- $\text{Estimated RTT} = (1 - \alpha) \cdot \text{Estimated RTT} + \alpha \cdot \text{Sample RTT}$
- $\text{Deviated RTT} = (1 - \beta) \cdot \text{Deviated RTT} + \beta \cdot | \text{Sample RTT} - \text{Estimated RTT} |$
- $\text{RTO} = \text{Estimated RTT} + 4 \cdot \text{Deviated RTT}$

For the first segment, the initial RTO is $1$ second. After sampling the first segment, the estimated RTT is the sample RTT and the deviated RTT is the half of the sample RTT.

When the segment is retransmitted, the RTT sample should not be taken, and the RTO should be doubled after each timeout.

#### Fast Retransmission

Each ACK is a duplicate ACK if the acknowledgement number is equal to the greatest acknowledgement received on the given connection, which implies that the receiver received an out-of-order segment. After 3 duplicated ACKs, the sender retransmits the segment, which is faster than the timeout based retransmission.

### Flow Control

The window sent in each segment indicates the range of sequence numbers the sender of the window is prepared to accept. The sending TCP endpoint packages the data to be transmitted into segments that fit the current window, and might repackage segments on the retransmission queue.

The sender keeps the amount of transmitted and unacknowledged data no more than the recent received window  size of the TCP peer. Therefore, the receiver could indicate a large window to encourage transmissions. If more data arrives than can be accepted, it will be discarded.

The sending TCP peer must transmit at least one octet of new data, or retransmit to the receiving TCP peer even if the send window is zero, in order to probe the window. When the receiving TCP peer has a zero window and a segment arrives, it must still send an acknowledgment showing its next expected sequence number and current window.

### Congestion Control

The TCP congestion control mechanism operating at the sender keeps a congestion window, which is a constraint on the rate at which a TCP sender can send traffic into the network. The sender keeps the amount of transmitted and unacknowledged data no more than the congestion window size.

- Each lost segment implies congestion, thusthe TCP sender's rate should be decreased when a segment is lost.

- Each acknowledged segment indicates that the network is delivering the sender's segments to the receiver, thus the sender's rate can be increased when an ACK arrives for an unacknowledged segment.

#### Algorithm

- Slow Start: When a TCP connection begins, the congestion window is initialized to $1$ MSS, resulting in an initial sending rate of $\frac{\text{MSS}}{\text{RTT}}$. The window increments at $1$ MSS for each unique acknowledged segment, which results in a doubling of the sending rate at each RTT.
  - If there's a timed out packet, the TCP sender sets the window to $1$ to restart the slow start process, and sets the slow start threshold to half of the window size.
  - If the window size reaches the previous slow start threshold, the TCP sender enters the congestion-avoidance mode.
  - If there's $3$ duplicate ACKs, the TCP sender sets the window and the slow start threshold to half of the window size, and enters the fast retransmission state.
- Congestion Avoidance: The window increments at $1$ MSS for all unique acknowledged segments at each RTT.
  - If there's a timed out packet, the TCP sender enters the slow start process, sets the window to $1$, and sets the slow start threshold to half of the window size.
  - If there's $3$ duplicate ACKs, the TCP sender sets the window and the slow start threshold to half of the window size, and enters the fast retransmission state.
- Fast Retransmission: The window increments at $1$ MSS for each duplicate ACK received for the missing segment that caused TCP to enter this state.
  - If there's a timed out packet, the TCP sender sets the window to $1$ to enter the slow start process, and sets the slow start threshold to half of the window size.
  - When an ACK arrives for the missing segment, the TCP sender enters the congestion-avoidance state and sets the window size to the slow start threshold.
