# RFC 9000

RFC 9000 defines the core of the QUIC transport protocol. QUIC provides applications with flow-controlled streams for structured communication, fast connection establishment, and network path migration.

- QUIC is a connection-oriented protocol that creates a stateful interaction between a client and server.

- The QUIC handshake combines negotiation of cryptographic and transport parameters. QUIC integrates the TLS handshake, although using a customized framing for protecting packets. The handshake is structured to permit the exchange of application data as soon as possible, which permits 0-RTT handshake.

- The endpoints communicates in QUIC through QUIC packets. Most packets contain frames, which contain control information and application data. QUIC supports packet authentication and encryption.

- Application protocols exchange information over a QUIC connection via streams, which are ordered sequences of bytes. Both unidirectional and bidirectional streams are supported.

- QUIC supports retransmission and congestion control.

- QUIC connections are not bound to a single network path. Connection migration uses connection identifiers to allow connections to transfer to a new network path.

- Multiple options are provided for connection termination. Applications can manage a graceful shutdown, endpoints can negotiate a timeout period, errors can cause immediate connection teardown, and a stateless mechanism provides for termination of connections after one endpoint has lost state.

## QUIC Packet

QUIC has two types of packet headers. QUIC packets for connection establishment need to contain several pieces of information, thus it uses the long header format. Once a connection is established, the subsequent packets use the short header format to reduce packet size. . In each packet, one or more frames can be embedded in it and each frame does not need to be of the same type as long as it is within the MTU limit.

Each packet in a QUIC connection is assigned a unique packet number, which indicates the transmission order of packets and is decoupled from loss detection. QUIC receiver acknowledges the largest packet number ever received and supports selective acknowledgement. When a QUIC packet is acknowledged, it indicates all the frames carried in that packet have been received.

## Stream

QUIC incorporates stream multiplexing into the transport layer, thus each QUIC connection can have multiple simultaneous flows. Each QUIC stream has a unique stream identifier, where its two least significant bits are used to indicate which endpoint initiated the stream and whether the stream is bidirectional or unidirectional. Each stream resembles a TCP connection, which provides an ordered byte-stream, which is consist of data frames.

The stream frame offset is equivalent to the sequence number of TCP, which is used for data frame ordering, loss detection, and retransmission. Each data frame could be identified with a `(stream_id, frame_offset)` tuple.

QUIC solves the head-of-line blocking problem of TCP, since a lost packet will block the stream with the data frames contained in the packet and won't affect other streams.
