# RFC 768

The UDP protocol is a connectionless transport-layer protocol that supports multiplexing or demultiplexing function and limited error checking.

- UDP takes messages from the application process, attaches source and destination port number fields for the multiplexing or demultiplexing service, adds the segment length and checksum, and passes the resulting segment to the network layer.

- The network layer encapsulates the transport-layer segment into an IP datagram and then makes a best-effort attempt to deliver the segment to the receiving host.

- If the segment arrives at the receiving host, UDP uses the destination port number to deliver the segment’s data to the correct application process.

## UDP Header Format

```txt
0      7 8     15 16    23 24    31
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|     Source      |   Destination   |
|      Port       |      Port       |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|                 |                 |
|     Length      |    Checksum     |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|
|          data bytes ...
+---------------- ...
```

- The source port indicates the port of the sending process.
- The destination port has a meaning within the context of a particular internet destination address.
- The length is the length in bytes of this user datagram including this header and the data.
- The checksum is the 16-bit one's complement of the one's complement sum of a
pseudo header of information from the IP header, the UDP header, and the
data, padded with zero octets at the end to make a multiple of two octets.

```rs
use byteorder::{ByteOrder, NetworkEndian};

fn checksum(data: &[u8]) -> u16 {
    let mut sum = 0u32;
    for i in 0..(data.len() / 2) {
        let word = NetworkEndian::read_u16(&data[i * 2..]);
        sum += u32::from(word);
    }

    if data.len() % 2 == 1 {
        sum += u32::from(data[data.len() - 1]) << 8;
    }

    while sum >> 16 != 0 {
        sum = (sum & 0xFFFF) + (sum >> 16);
    }
    !sum as u16
}
```

The pseudo header prefixed to the UDP header contains the source address, the destination address, the protocol, and the UDP length, which gives protection against misrouted datagrams. The pseudo header is used when calculating the checksum, but it's neither sent with the UDP segment nor counted in the length of the segment.

```txt
0      7 8     15 16    23 24    31
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|          source address           |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|        destination address        |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
|  zero  |protocol|   UDP length    |
+--------+--------+--------+--------+
```
