# N4775: Working Draft, C++ Extensions for Coroutines

## Introduction

A coroutine is a generalization of a function that allows the function to be suspended and then later resumed. The activation frame of a coroutine is divided into a coroutine frame and a stack frame. The stack frame, as in a normal function, can hold the variables whose lifetime doesn't span a coroutine suspend-point. The coroutine frame, allocated on the heap, can hold the registers and variables that persist while the coroutine is suspended.

- The call operation allocates a coroutine frame and moves the parameters from the stack frame into the coroutine frame so that the parameters live longer than the first suspend point. It resumes execution of the caller when it reaches the first suspend-point.
- The suspend operation suspends execution of the coroutine at the current point within the function and transfers execution back to the caller or resumer without destroying the activation frame. When a coroutine hits a suspend-point (`co_await` or `co_yield`), it stores the registers to the coroutine frame and writes a value that indicates which suspend-point the coroutine is being suspended at. The stack frame is freed and the execution is transferred to the caller.
- The resume operation resumes the execution of a suspended coroutine at the point at which it was suspended.
- The destroy operation destroys the activation frame without resuming the execution of the coroutine. Instead of transferring execution to the suspend-point, it transfers execution to a code path that invokes the destructors of all local variables in-scope and frees the coroutine frame.
- The return operation stores the return value and destructs in-scope local variables, either suspending or destroying the coroutine.

## `co_await`

`co_await` is an operator that allows a coroutine to suspend itself and schedule to be resumed. It must be used in the context of a coroutine. A type that supports the `co_await` operator is an `awaitable` type. A type that implements `await_ready`, `await_suspend`, and `await_resume` is an `awaiter` type.

The compiler generates code to obtain the `awaiter` object from `<expr>`. Assume that the promise object for the awaiting coroutine has type `P` and the `promise` is an lvalue reference to the promise object for the coroutine. If `P` has a member named `await_transform`, then `<expr>` is first passed into a call to `promise.await_transform(<expr>)` to obtain the `awaitable` value. Otherwise, the generated code evaluates `<expr>` to obtain the `awaitable` value. If the `awaitable` has an applicable `operator co_await()` overload, then the generated code invokes it to obtain the `awaiter` object. Otherwise, the `awaitable` value is used as the `awaiter` object.

```cpp
template <typename P, typename T>
decltype(auto) get_awaitable(P &promise, T &&expr) {
  if constexpr (has_await_transform_member<P>) {
    return promise.await_transform(std::forward<T>(expr));
  } else {
    return std::forward<T>(expr);
  }
}

template <typename A> decltype(auto) get_awaiter(A &&awaitable) {
  if constexpr (has_member_operator_co_await<A>) {
    return std::forward<A>(awaitable).operator co_await();
  } else if constexpr (has_non_member_operator_co_await<A>) {
    return operator co_await(std::forward<A>(awaitable));
  } else {
    return std::forward<A>(awaitable);
  }
}

auto &&value = <expr>;
auto &&awaitable = get_awaitable(promise, std::forward<decltype(value)>(value));
auto &&awaiter = get_awaiter(std::forward<decltype(awaitable)>(awaitable));
```

After obtaining the `awaiter` object, the generated code invokes its `await_ready()` method. If it returns `false`, the generated code suspends the coroutine and invokes the `awaiter` object's `await_suspend()` method. If it returns `void` or `true`, the coroutine transfers execution back to the caller or resumer of the coroutine. If it returns `false`, it behaves as if scheduling the coroutine for immediate resumption on the current thread.

The `await_suspend()` method should schedule the coroutine for resumption or destruction at some point in the future once the operation has been completed. The coroutine is considered suspended in the `await_suspend()` method. When the suspended coroutine is resumed, the generated code invokes its `await_resume()` method. Its return value becomes the result of the `co_await <expr>` expression.

```cpp
if (!awaiter.await_ready()) {
  // <suspend-coroutine>

  using handle_t = std::coroutine_handle<P>::from_promise(p);
  using result_t = decltype(awaiter.await_suspend(std::declval<handle_t>()));
  if constexpr (std::same_as<result_t, void>) {
    awaiter.await_suspend(handle_t::from_promise(p));
    // <return-to-caller-or-resumer>
  }
  if constexpr (std::same_as<result_t, bool>) {
    if (awaiter.await_suspend(handle_t::from_promise(p))) {
      // <return-to-caller-or-resumer>
    }
  }

  // <resume-point>
}

return awaiter.await_resume();
```

One advantage of this design is that the coroutine is guaranteed to be suspended when the generated code invokes `await_suspend()`. Otherwise, if the `awaiter` schedules the coroutine to be resumed in another thread, that thread might resume it when it hasn't been suspended.

However, once the coroutine is scheduled to be resumed in another thread, that thread might resume it before `await_suspend()` returns. The coroutine could then run to completion, destructing the coroutine and promise object, all before `await_suspend()` returns. Therefore, within the `await_suspend()` method, once it's possible for the coroutine to be resumed on another thread, accessing `this` or the coroutine's promise object might be undefined behavior.

## Promise

The promise object defines and controls the behavior of the coroutine. The compiler relies on `std::coroutine_traits<R, Args...>` to determine the type of the promise object. Its default definition provides a member type `promise_type` that is equal to the member type `promise_type` of `R`, which is the return type of the coroutine function. The promise type can define an `await_transform()` method and the generated code will transform the expression of `co_await` with it.

- When the coroutine function is invoked, the generated code invokes `operator new` to allocate the coroutine frame. If the promise type, `P`, defines a custom `operator new` method then that is invoked, otherwise the global `operator new` is invoked. The compiler is free to elide the allocation as an optimization if it is able to determine that the lifetime of the coroutine frame is nested within the lifetime of the caller and it can determine the size of the coroutine frame required at the call site.
- The generated code moves the parameters of the coroutine function to the coroutine frame. The reference parameters might not be valid for the lifetime of the coroutine.
- The generated code constructs the promise object in the coroutine frame. The compiler checks if there's an overload of the promise object's constructor that can accept lvalue references to each of the parameters and invokes it if it exists. Otherwise, the compiler falls back to the default constructor.
- The generated code invokes the promise object's `get_return_object()` method and returns the return value to the caller of the coroutine function when it suspends for the first time or finishes execution without suspension.
- The generated code invokes the promise object's `initial_suspend()` method and `co_await` the return value. `std::suspend_never` indicates that the coroutine will start eagerly and `std::suspend_always` indicates that the coroutine won't start until it's resumed.
- When the coroutine reaches a `co_return` statement, the generated code invokes the promise object's `return_void()` method or `return_value(<expr>)` method. After the invocation, it destructs all local variables with automatic storage duration in reverse order of construction.
- If an exception propagates out of the coroutine, the exception is caught and the promise object's `unhandled_exception()` method is invoked.
- Once the coroutine finishes execution, the generated code will invoke the promise object's `final_suspend()` method and `co_await` the return value. This allows the coroutine to execute some logic, such as publishing a result, signaling completion, or resuming a continuation. It's undefined behavior to resume a coroutine that's suspended at this point.

## Coroutine Handle

The `std::coroutine_handle<P>` type represents a non-owning handle to the coroutine frame and can be used to resume execution of the coroutine or get access to the coroutine's promise object.

- The `resume()` method resumes a suspended coroutine at `<resume-point>` and the call will return when the coroutine hits a `<return-to-caller-or-resumer>` point.
- The `destroy()` method invokes the destructors of all in-scope variables and deallocates the coroutine frame.
- The `promise()` method returns a reference to the coroutine's promise object.
- The `address()` method converts a coroutine handle to a `void*` pointer that can be passed as a parameter into existing C PAIs.

The `coroutine_handle` of the awaiting coroutine will be passed into the `await_suspend()` method of the awaiter after the coroutine has suspended at a `co_await` expression.
