# P0009R18: `MDSPAN`

[P0009R18](https://wg21.link/P0009R18) is a proposal for C++23 that introduces `mdspan`, a multidimensional array view. The `mdspan` class template can represent arbitrary mixes of compile-time or run-time extents. Its element type can be a complete object type that is neither an abstract class type nor an array type. The layout mapping specifies the formula, and properties of the formula, for mapping a multidimensional index to an element of the array. The accessor governs how elements are read and written.

A multidimensional array of rank maps from a tuple of  indices to a single offset index. Each of the  indices in the tuple is in a bounded range whose inclusive lower bound is zero, and whose nonnegative exclusive upper bound is that index's extent. The offset index ranges over a subset of a bounded contiguous index range whose lower bound is zero, and whose upper bound is the product of the extents.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <mdspan>
#include <vector>

std::vector<std::uint64_t> matrix(6);
std::mdspan<std::uint64_t, std::extents<std::uint64_t, 1, 2, 3>> mdspan(matrix.data());
mdspan[0, 0, 0] = 1;
std::cout << mdspan[0, 0, 0] << std::endl;
```

## Extent

```cpp
template <class SizeType, size_t... Extents> class extents;

template <class SizeType, size_t Rank> using dextents = ...;
```

The class template `extents` represents a multidimensional index space of rank equal to `sizeof...(Extents)`. Each element of `Extents` is either equal to `dynamic_extent` or is representable as a value of type `SizeType`. The dynamic extents are stored in an array of `SizeType`.

The alias template `dextents` represents all-dynamic extents. Each specialization of it `dextents<SizeType, Rank>` is equivalent to `extents<SizeType, std::dynamic_extent, ...>`, where `std::dynamic_extent` is repeated for `Rank` times.

## Layout

## Accessor
