# P0288R9: `move_only_function`

[P0288R9](https://wg21.link/P0288R9) is a proposal for C++23 that introduces `std::move_only_function`, a conservative, move-only equivalent of `std::function`. It doesn't have the const-correctness bug of `std::function`, provides support for `const`/`&`/`&&`/`noexcept` qualified function types, doesn't have the `target_type()` and `target()` accessors, and imposes a strong precondition on invocation.

## Motivation

`std::function` is a function wrapper introduced in C++11. `std::function` can store, copy, and invoke copy-constructible callable objects, which excludes move-only callable objects. `std::move_only_function` addresses this issue as it doesn't provide a copy-constructor and a copy-assignment operator.

```cpp
auto invocation_count = std::make_unique<std::uint64_t>(0);
// error: std::function target must be copy-constructible
std::function fn = [invocation_count = std::move(invocation_count)]() {
  std::println("{}", *invocation_count);
  *invocation_count += 1;
};

while (true) {
  fn();
}
```

`std::function` has a const-correctness bug. Its `operator()` is `const`-qualified even though the function object's `operator()` might be not, so it's possible to invoke a function object's non-`const` operator through a `const` instance. Because `std::function` owns the callable object, this bug will allow code to mutate its content through a `const`-reference. `std::move_only_function` addresses this issue.

```cpp
// the `operator()` of the lambda expression's function object is not `const`-qualified
auto lambda = [&] mutable {};

{
  std::function<void(void)> fn = lambda;
  fn();

  const auto &fn_ref = fn;
  // the `operator()` of `lambda` is not `const`-qualified, but the invocation compiles
  fn_ref();
}

{
  std::move_only_function<void(void)> fn = lambda;
  fn();

  const auto &fn_ref = fn;
  // the `operator()` of `fn_ref` is not `const`-qualified, so the invocation is invalid
  fn_ref();
}

{
  // the `operator()` of `lambda` is not `const`-qualified, so the constraints can't be satisfied
  std::move_only_function<void(void) const> fn = lambda;
}
```

## Design

```cpp
template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes> class move_only_function;

template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes>
class move_only_function<
    R(ArgTypes...) MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_CV
        MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_REF noexcept(MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_NOEXCEPT)>;
```

The `<functional>` header provides a partial specialization of `move_only_function` for each combination of the qualifiers on the function type:

- `MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_CV` is either empty or `const`.
- `MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_REF` is either empty, `&`, or `&&`.
- `MOVE_ONLY_FUNCTION_NOEXCEPT` is either `true` or `false`.

`std::move_only_function` class template provides polymorphic wrappers that generalize the notion of a callable object. These wrappers can store, move, and call callable objects, given a call signature, allowing functions to be first-class objects. The constructor that accepts a callable object is constrained with `std::is_invocable_r` or `std::is_nothrow_invocable_r`. The qualifiers present in the class template parameter will be forwarded to its `operator()`. The `operator()` won't check if the callable object is present, so it won't throw the `std::bad_function_call` exception.
