# P0792R14: `function_ref`: a type-erased callable reference

[P0792R14](https://wg21.link/P0792R14) is a proposal for C++26 that introduces `std::function_ref`, a vocabulary type with reference semantics for passing callable objects.

## Motivation

The higher-order function pattern is common in C++, such as the comparator of `std::ranges::sort` or the predicate of `std:::views::filter`. There are multiple methods to accept a higher-order function as a function parameter:

- Function pointer: This approach has the minimum overhead, but it doesn't support function objects.
- Template parameter: This approach supports all callable objects, but it requires the implementation to constraint the signature (with `std:is_invocable_v`, for example) and convert the function to a function template.
- `std::function` or `std::move_only_function`: This approach supports all callable objects, but it requires them to be copy-constructible or move-constructible, respectively. The call wrappers start to allocate the callable objects when they can't fit in a small buffer.

The proposed `function_ref` supports all callable objects regardless of whether they are copy-constructible or move-constructible. It has minimum overhead, as it avoids allocations and exceptions. Moreover, certain calling conventions can pass its instances in registers.

## Design

```cpp
template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes> class function_ref;

template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes>
class function_ref<R(ArgTypes...) FUNCTION_REF_CV noexcept(FUNCTION_REF_NOEXCEPT)>;
```

The `<functional>` header provides a partial specialization of `function_ref` for each combination of the qualifiers on the function type:

- `FUNCTION_REF_CV` is either empty or `const`.
- `FUNCTION_REF_NOEXCEPT` is either `true` or `false`.

Each specialization of `function_ref` is a trivially copyable type that models `copyable`. Because `function_ref` has the reference semantic, its `operator()` is `const`-qualified and it enforces the callable object to be lvalue-callable.

`std::function_ref` can be constructed from a function or a function object. However, it cannot be constructed from a pointer to a member function or a pointer to a data member. This limitation exists because pointers to member functions have a different representation than regular function pointers, requiring at least twice the space in Clang. Including support for member function pointers would increase the size of `std::function_ref`.

```cpp
template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes> class function_ref {
  template <class F> function_ref(F *f) noexcept;
  template <class F> constexpr function_ref(F &&f) noexcept;
};
```

Since the representation of pointers to member functions or data members is known at compile time, they can be accepted as non-type template parameters, meaning they won't occupy any storage. To support this, `std::function_ref` provides constructors that accept a specialization of `std::nontype_t`, which wraps a non-type template parameter, along with an optional object to which the member pointer will be bound, effectively converting it into a regular function.

```cpp
template <typename R, typename... ArgTypes> class function_ref {
  template <auto f> constexpr function_ref(nontype_t<f>) noexcept;
  template <auto f, class U>
  constexpr function_ref(nontype_t<f>, U &&obj) noexcept;
  template <auto f, class T>
  constexpr function_ref(nontype_t<f>, FUNCTION_REF_CV T *obj) noexcept;
};
```
