# P2415R2: What is a `view`?

[P2415R2](https://wg21.link/P2415R2) is a proposal for C++20 that relaxes the `move` concept to support types that are not constant-time destructible while still guarantee the cheap construction of range adaptors. It introduces a `owning_view` class template, enabling `views::all` to support movable rvalue non-`view` ranges.

- [P0896R4](https://wg21.link/P0896R4) introduces the `view` concept. It states that a type `T` models `view` if it's default constructible, constant-time copyable, and constant-time movable.
- [P1456R1](https://wg21.link/P1456R1) relaxes the `view` concept. It states that a type `T` models `view` if it's default constructible, constant-time movable, and constant-time destructible. If `T` is copyable, it should be constant-time copyable.
- [P2325R3](https://wg21.link/P2325R3) relaxes the `view` concept. It states that a type `T` models `view` if it's constant-time movable and constant-time destructible. If `T` is copyable, it should be constant-time copyable.

## Motivation

The initial motivation of the constant-time copyable constraint is that the range-based algorithms might take views by value. However, if they are implemented as this, they won't be able to operate directly on ranges. (For example, `ranges::reverse(v)` would be invalid if `v` is a `std::vector<T>`.) Therefore, they are revised to take ranges by forwarding references.

```cpp
template <ranges::bidirectional_range R>
  requires std::permutable<ranges::iterator_t<R>>
constexpr ranges::borrowed_iterator_t<R> reverse(R &&r);
```

The author states that the actual motivation for the constant-time copyable constraint is that range adaptors, such as `transform_view`, still take views by value. If the constraint is relaxed, constructing a chain of range adaptors might be an expensive operation. Because the range adaptors are lazily-evaluated, their constructions should be cheap. Otherwise, users bear the runtime cost without actual work being done at that point. The author concludes that the goal of the `view` concept is to guarantee the cheap construction of range adaptors.

## Proposal

The author proposes a scenario that satisfies the cheap construction of range adaptors while violating the existing constraints of the `view` concept. For example, the `bad_view` class is non-copyable, constant-time movable, and linear-time destructible, which doesn't model `view`. However, constructing a range adaptor from a `bad_view` is no more expensive than constructing one from a `ref_view<vector<uint64_t>>`. Moreover, a linear-time destruction of `vector<uint64_t>` is required in either case, so `bad_view`'s linear-time destructor doesn't affect the performance.

```cpp
class bad_view : public std::ranges::view_interface<bad_view> {
public:
  bad_view(std::vector<std::uint64_t> v) : data_(std::move(v)) {}

  bad_view(bad_view const &) = delete;
  bad_view(bad_view &&) = default;
  bad_view &operator=(bad_view const &) = delete;
  bad_view &operator=(bad_view &&) = default;

  auto begin() { return data_.begin(); }
  auto end() { return data_.end(); }

private:
  std::vector<std::uint64_t> data_;
};

static_assert(std::ranges::view<bad_view>);
```

The author concludes that the requirement of constant-time destruction can be relaxed without violating the goal of the `view` concept. The requirement is reformulated such that if `N` moves are made from an object of type `T` that containes `M` elements, then these `N` objects have `O(N + M)` destruction. It implies that the moved-from object is constant-time destructible.

Based on the revisited requirement, the author proposes to introduce the  `owning_view`, which is a `view` that has unique ownership of a range. It is movable and stores the range within it. It will still guarantee the cheap construction of range adaptors. Moreover, the author proposes to revise the `view::all` range adaptor so that it will capture the ownership of movable rvalue non-`view` ranges through `owning_view`. The `viewable_range` concept is updated to accept this type of range.

In the end, the author attempts to define what is a `view`. This is exemplified through the code snippet: `auto rng = v | views::reverse;`. If `v` is an lvalue, the decision hinges on whether `rng` should copy `v` or refer to it. If copying `v` is preferred because it's a cheap operation and it can avoid potential dangling, then `v` is considered a `view`. Conversely, if referencing `v` is more practical, particularly when copying `v` is expensive, then `v` is not a `view`. For instance, `string_view` is a `view`, while `string` is not.
