# P2440R1: `ranges::iota`, `ranges::shift_left`, and `ranges::shift_right`

[P2440R1](https://wg21.link/P2440R1) is a proposal for C++23 that introduces the algorithms `ranges::iota`, `ranges::shift_left`, and `ranges::shift_right`.

## `ranges::iota`

As [P2214R2](https://wg21.link/P2214R2) explains, while the adoption of other numeric algorithms is a far more complex endeavor due to missing constraints, `ranges::iota` is straightforward.

The `ranges::iota` algorithm is not redundant to `views::iota`. The algorithm determines the number of values to write based on the output range, whereas consuming a `views::iota` requires that information to be passed in explicitly. Otherwise, it would result in an infinite range.

Following the law of useful returns, the author proposes returning both the end of the range and the final value, using the type `ranges::out_value_result`.

## `ranges::shift_left` and `ranges::shift_right`

The author suggests concerns about the return type of `ranges::shift_left`. If the return type is a `ranges::subrange` of the shifted range, it loses information about the original end of the range. There are particular concerns about the difficulty of recovering the original end when sentinels are involved, as the elements between the end of the new range and the previous end could have been moved from.

However, if the returned range is empty (e.g., the shift amount is greater than the size of the range), the algorithm may not need to compute the end iterator of the original range. Instead, it only requires the size, which can be computed in constant time if the range models `ranges::sized_range` or if the iterator and sentinel model `std::sized_sentinel_for`. In this case, the range remains unchanged, so the sentinel remains usable. If the returned range is not empty, the original end can be found simply by incrementing the end of the returned `ranges::subrange` by the shift amount.
