# P2442R1: Windowing range adaptors: `views::chunk` and `views::slide`

[P2442R1](https://wg21.link/P2442R1) is a proposal for C++23 that introduces the `views::chunk` and `views::slide` range adaptor objects.

## `views::chunk`

`views::chunk(R, N)` divides `R` into non-overlapping `N`-sized chunks, except that the last chunk can be smaller than `N` in size. It is a precondition that `N` is positive. Given expressions `E` and `N`, the expression `views::chunk(E, N)` is expression-equivalent to `chunk_view(E, N)`.

```cpp
for (const auto &chunk : std::views::iota(1) | std::views::take(10) | std::views::chunk(5)) {
  for (const auto &element : chunk) {
    std::cout << element << ' ';
  }
  std::cout << std::endl;
}
```

### Implementation

`views::chunk` supports `input_range`, even though the algorithm for such support is different. In particular, the iterator and the related iteration state is tracked in the `chunk_view` object itself, which means that it doesn't support `const` iteration. Because the inner iterator and outer iterator share state, moving from the stored iterators can invalidate both iterators,

## `views::slide`

`views::slide(R, N)` produces a range of ranges such that the `M`-th range is a view into the `M`-th through `(M + N - 1)`-th element of `R`. It is a precondition that `N` is positive. It doesn't support `input_range`. Given expressions `E` and `N`, the expression `views::slide(E, N)` is expression-equivalent to `slide_view(E, N)`.

```cpp
for (const auto &chunk : std::views::iota(1) | std::views::take(10) | std::views::slide(5)) {
  for (const auto &element : chunk) {
    std::cout << element << ' ';
  }
  std::cout << std::endl;
}
```

### Implementation

- `slide_view` is a `view` that owns the `views::all_t<R>` and `range_difference_t<views::all_t<R>> N`.
  - `slide_view` use caches to provide amortized constant-time `begin()` and `end()` methods.
    - `slide_view` caches nothing if `views::all_t<R>` models `random_access_range` and `sized_range`.
    - Otherwise, `slide_view` caches `end()` if `views::all_t<R>` models `bidirectional_range`.
    - Otherwise, `slide_view` caches `begin()`.
  - The `begin() const` method requires that `slide_view` doesn't need a cache and returns a `const` iterator that points to the first sliding window. (Otherwise, this method can't be `const` because it might mutate the cache.)
  - The `begin()` method returns an iterator that points to the first sliding window.
    - If `slide_view` caches `begin()`, the iterator it returns also records the last element of that window.
  - The `end() const` method requires that `slide_view` doesn't need a cache and returns a `const` iterator that points to the pass-the-end sliding window.
  - The `end()` method returns an iterator.
    - If `slide_view` caches nothing or caches `end()`, the iterator it returns points to the pass-the-end sliding window. Because it needs to support `operator--()`, it needs to know the beginning of the pass-the-end sliding window, so it can be decremented to point to the previous window.
    - Otherwise, the iterator it returns holds the last element of `views::all_t<R>`.
  - The `size()` method and `size() const` methods return the number of sliding windows.
- `slide_view::iterator` is the iteration that represents a sliding window. It holds `current`, which is the first element of the sliding window, and `N`. It dereferences to `views::counted(current, N)`. (The reason to use `views::counted` is that the sliding window is guaranteed to have at `N` elements. Otherwise, it will equal to the pass-the-end sliding window.)
  - If `slide_view` caches `first()`, `slide_view::iterator` holds `last_element`, which is the last element of the sliding window. Therefore, instead of iterating through the whole `views::all_t<R>` to find the pass-the-end sliding window, the `end()` method of `slide_view` can instead return a `slide_view::iterator` that holds the last element of `views::all_t<R>`, which can be compared with the `last_element` of another `slide_view::iterator`  to determine if the `slide_view::iterator` has reached the end.
  - For `operator++()` and `operator--()`, both `current` and `last_element` (if available) will be adjusted.
